---
title: 'On Effective Science Communication'
date: 2022-04-23
permalink: /posts/2022/04/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - science communication
---

# Why scientists should talk like regular humans

I have always been the weird kid in school. Although I was never bullied, I found it hard to make friends in school. And then everything changed in college. I realized that I could talk with anyone about anything. Having lively conversations and debates about things with people became a norm. And then a few years ago, I became a scientist. I can't really explain how that happened or when. I just know that between college and grad school, I acquired the skills that earned me that identity. It was mostly inconsequential. I mean there was no induction ceremony for joining the "order" nor was there a membership fee to pay. It was mostly a ego boost: the realization that I was barely capable of designing scientific experiments, analyze data and talk with others; I mean other scientists. 
 
 
I had first heard the phrase "general audience" in a seminar back in college. The girl I was dating back then was majoring in microbiology and their department was organizing a seminar (I have now forgotten what it was about). I was attending the seminar just for the free food that was being served. There, the speaker first inquired of how many in the audience were not biologists (there were quite a few) and went on to promise that she would keep the talk as "general audience" friendly as possible. It did not really feel weird then. But then I realized that every time I came home to the place where I grew up and talked with my friends about my life and the research projects I was involved in, they would often zone out. It was a weird feeling. In the beginning, it was disappointing. But then with time I grew elated and excited. I felt that there was charm in doing something/ talking about something that nobody in that group of friends or family understood. It felt like I was inducted into a secret society and that I was practicing an elite trade (scientific research). It felt that I was suddenly released from the shackles of "common mass thinking" and I had joined the Jedi order. Ego as multiple studies in psychology shows, is a very dangerous thing. This false sense of superiority wasn't the first mistake in my life. But it was definitely one of my greatest.
 
I did not realize that by slowly clustering the 'general public' and scientists into a dichotomy of us and them, I was compromising my ability to be an efficient science communicator. And things really took an interesting turn when during a long conversation, my girlfriend started talking about some personal issues of hers. Upon starting, she remarked that while she knew that it was not the 'normal' conversation that I usually have with others, she wanted to talk about it anyways. And that is where I realized that the problem that I had with friends zoning off and the fact that I did not have much meaningful friendships in school stemmed from the same problem: the nature of science communication and education. That problem goes on to create a situation where scientists and non-scientists feel culturally inaccessible to each other. 
 
Who are scientists? I am not good with definitions and so I will refer to anyone studying and doing scientific research to be a scientist (unfortunately that includes social scientists too...but that's a different story). One thing that one needs to understand is that scientists are a subset of the "general population". And as any scientist would agree, the more one specializes in a particular research domain, the more one realizes that there will be someone who will consider me the "general public" in their domain/specialization. 
 
One might argue that the very point of this post is flawed and meaningless. They might argue that scientists are equipped with a particular vocabulary and specialized training to conduct research. And hence the "general public" can never understand the work of scientists until the research is distilled and over-simplified to be presented as a part of popular science. So what it boils down to is that the "general public" can understand the results of tax funded research only if some scientist (or writer) bothers to present the material into a form that is free of jargons and assumptions about some previous knowledge about a specialization? That doesn't sound right! 
 
We are all witnessing a steady growth in an anti-science attitude in the recent years. From millennials getting obsessed with numerology and astrology to a steady decrease in public funded research. We are witnessing how divisive politics is being done by piggybacking on baseless conspiracy theories about vaccines and climate change. And so there is an urgent need of ramping up science communication. It is also necessary to remember that scientists, being a part of society, are accountable for their actions. And to be accountable, scientists need to hear what the "general public" has to say. It is only by being receptive about the perspectives and concerns of the general populace that science can move forward. Very often, the misconceptions in people stem from the inability of scientists to get the proper facts out into the world. Scientists can churn out paper after paper about critical issues faced by humanity. And yet, none of it will matter if the larger population will not read and understand them. Scientists cannot force action. They can only suggest the steps. The action is a part of policy and its implementation/adoption. And that needs effective communication. 
 
 
Another problem that causes the scientist and non-scientist divide is the notion of finality. First, it is a terrible mistake on the part of scientists to assume that they have all the answers. And that causes them to distance themselves from other opinions. Scientists need to be humble and open to the opinion of others. Listening is a key component of communication. I personally chose a career in science and academia because that is the only profession that pays me to be a student for the rest of my life. And who is a student? I believe a student is someone who is ready to accept new perspectives based on facts and have their beliefs changed and perspectives broadened. A teacher should first and foremost also be a student. Likewise, scientists should have to be humble who are able to change their beliefs based on rational arguments (even if they come from non-scientists). No scientist can be the final authority on anything. If history is to be remembered, even the mighty Issac Newton's theories had to give way to Einstein's more generalized theory. The second notion about finality is how the "general population" perceives and interprets data. As any scientist would say, it is easy to spin any story if you know how to play with statistics. And thus to be saved from deceit, one needs to avoid subjective interpretation of data. The media is often at fault when some preliminary scientific results are passed off as final conclusions. But again, hypotheses and tentative conclusions do not translate to catchy headlines. And that is why we need good scientific communication. Scientists need to explain the "general population" about the aspect of finality in their data.
 
 
Now going back to the point of science education, that is where science communication matters the most. I grew up loving science and was lucky enough to have supportive parents who did not stop me from doing weird science experiments in school. I distinctly remember mixing toilet cleaner with bleach and attempting to taste if the mixture tasted 'salty'. That was one the 'experiments' that I did as a child. But I did not find that enthusiasm in my teachers in school. They would obviously finish the syllabus and by the end of the school year we would be getting graded in exams. However, I did not find many people to share my enthusiasm about research. When I did find a stage to find like-minded people, it was in different science-exhibitions. Frankly, it was very exciting to hear "real-life scientists" talk about their research back then. But then again, what they would say seemed distant and not relatable. Effective science communication has to start from schools. And for that we need to train the school teachers to be effective at communicating science not just a job but to approach it with the students as something that is the pivot of the modern human civilization. And to do all of that, scientists and professors need to come out of the seclusion and bubble of their labs and immediate academic circle to motivate the next generation of scientists and teachers in the classrooms. PhD students must realize that their research would really matter if it impacts the wider society. And that can happen only with proper science communication. That can happen only if scientists would "talk like regular humans". 
 
When I finish my Ph.D, I might be able to say that "We might have found how to make AI systems better handle data from different types of input modalities (text,images,audio) at the same time i.e. simultaneously and do reasoning by drawing inference and conclusions from the input data. But our findings are pretty specific to the case of natural language understanding and machine translation under some specific conditions". That is it. I will probably need years (actually decades) of research to extend the observations and math so that AI systems work as efficiently as we want them to. It would be thus pretty stupid for a tabloid to say "Indian scientist discovers way to make machines as smart as humans. Machines can now see and talk like humans". I mean although that would be an extremely cool headline but it would be a misrepresentation of facts! And so, that means, to ensure that it does not happen, I have to keep writing posts and hone my writing skills (non academic writing) so that I can communicate my findings (to the "general audience") in a much better way than those tabloids! 
 
Thus, in conclusion, I would just sat that as scientists, we should strive to be not just better at our research but also at disseminating our findings in such a way that it is palatable by the "general audience". And I guess a good way to start is to start with your closest family members (especially interesting to discuss this with your partner if they are non-scientists) and then slowly hone your skills. Scientists have a moral obligation. And they should fulfill that! 